Welcome to Adopting Automatic
Reference Counting or ARC.
I'm Malcolm Crawford.
I work in developer publications.
This morning, two main sections.
I'm going to talk through the
first sections on manual memory
management and then what is ARC.
And then Dave Zed will talk in more
detail about how it works and how
you switch across to using ARC.
So, to turn first of all to
manual memory management,
we've used a mechanism for
doing memory management for the
better part of two decades now.
We're looking to change that,
so clearly there has to be
some sort of a problem here.
Why are we addressing this?
Well, it turns out that there are
problems with memory management.
It turns out in particular that memory
management is the number one reason
for apps crashing and that ultimately
leads then to the number one reason
for apps being rejected from the store.
So anything that we can do to
prevent problems with memory
management is going to be welcome.
At least to the question though,
What were the problems?
Why do people have
problems with traditional
Objective-C memory management?
After all, the rules, for example,
were pretty straightforward.
Thank you!
However, there were details,
lots of details.
The simplest among these,
you had to think about the
naming conventions and adhere
to those and possibly you had to
think about auto release pools,
blocks came in,
you had to worry about whether the
method that you used was return an
auto released object and then think
about not calling it auto released,
it was an object you didn't own,
and then maybe you wanted to use alloc
init instead and all of these sum
together then to lead to effectively
cognitive overload or at the very least
a set of things to think about that
weren't directly related to your primary
goal of implementing interesting code.
What made it worse was you needed
to do it right all of the time,
so you never were allowed to
forget the rules or make a mistake.
And it turns out that with
the best people in the world,
this isn't what people are best at.
[Transcript missing]
The other observation that was part
of the development of the analyzer
was the realization that Cocoa has
strong patterns and conventions,
and in particular the naming conventions.
So, stepping back again to the analyzer,
if we've got a tool that's able to figure
out when you're following the rules
and if you're breaking them and so on,
perhaps we can actually
invert things a little bit.
So, ARC
formalizes conventions for us
and then automates the rules
so that you don't have to.
And in particular,
this then is what compilers are best at,
following and adhering to rules.
It also, in general,
is a sort of big picture,
a slide that you might have
seen before and probably see
again during the conference,
fits in with a general
evolution of Objective-C.
Starting from C,
we're gradually making the language
and the environment safer and simpler
through automating aspects of it,
and now ARC is the
latest addition to that.
So then, what is ARC?
In essence,
as you should have really got already,
ARC provides automatic memory management,
but I'll emphasize a second part,
for Objective-C objects.
So it's just for Objective-C.
ARC obeys and enforces the
existing conventions for you.
It's important that it obeys and adheres
to the existing conventions because
this is what then makes ARC compatible
with existing code that you already
have and with frameworks that we already
have that don't necessarily yet use ARC.
ARC introduces a couple
of useful features,
in particular, weak references.
I'll talk a little bit more
about weak references later.
And then takes advantage of some
performance optimizations so that you
don't see any performance regressions.
Conversely,
a couple of things that ARC is not,
first of all,
there's a corollary of the first,
it's not a new runtime memory model.
It doesn't automate
C structures and so on.
So you still have to use Malecon-free
and do memory management for core
foundation style objects yourself.
It's also not garbage collection.
So it doesn't have the problems
that garbage collection
does that are particularly
problematic on devices like this.
Fundamentally, it works simply by adding
the appropriate retain,
release, auto-release,
and so on methods for you that you would
have otherwise had to have written.
So, quick pop quiz.
I trust everyone will instantly see the
problem with this method implementation.
It doesn't adhere to the
proper naming conventions.
ARC, when you compile this code,
will notice and do the
right thing for you.
So it'll add the code that you
should have written yourself.
Conversely,
if you'd implemented Greeting this way,
ARC will again realize
and not make any changes.
The code's already correct.
As a tangent to this,
a useful aspect of ARC is that
then both of the possible ways
of implementing this method have,
in effect, the same cognitive load.
You no longer have to think about,
"Do I use alloc and init with format,
or do I use string with format?"
You simply use the method that
you are most comfortable with,
and don't worry about the
memory management aspects.
Hopefully now that's sufficiently
enthused you to switch it on,
so how do you switch it on?
There's a project setting in Xcode.
That's the fundamental thing that
switches the compiler flag for you.
If you've got...
A new project,
all projects now default to using ARC,
so there's no additional
work that you have to do.
If you have an existing project
that you want to migrate to ARC,
Then you do actually have
to use a migration tool.
And all of these then Dave is
going to talk about in more
detail in the next section.
Generally, what you should see when you
switch across to ARC is a
lot of code simply goes away.
So, typically, for example,
a dialog method just
doesn't exist anymore.
Other things become simpler,
so dealing with the memory
management semantics of blocks.
leaves you just with the code
that you wanted to write,
rather than thinking about having
to copy and then auto-release.
Sorry about that slide.
An issue that does
come up though is that,
having talked about the
static analyzer earlier,
the static analyzer depends on heuristics
to reason about the Objective-C rules of
memory management conventions and so on,
and isn't necessarily deterministic.
You can't have a compiler
that isn't deterministic.
So,
in order to make sure we get consistent
and reliable results from ARC,
from the general perspective,
we had to formalize and
automate the best practice,
but we're also introducing
four new rules.
That might sound a little
bit like a step backwards,
but an important aspect here is
because we're formalizing any
particular automating the rules here,
the compiler can actually
enforce the rules.
So even if you forget about
something somewhere online,
the compiler is there to remind you
and compile time rather than you
discovering through a crash log later.
So, let's look at the rules.
The first one I think I would
call a feature rather than
a new rule to think about.
You can't now use retain, release,
auto-release, and so on.
The benefit here is that you
can't write code like this.
So we generally regard
this as being a benefit.
Instead of having to deal about
memory management methods,
the compiler takes care of it for you.
It does mean that there are a couple
of other new practices to introduce,
particularly, for example,
the way you deal with singletons,
but we've got straightforward
new patterns for those.
So, rule two.
You can't use references
to objects in C structs.
The compiler again has got to be
able to reason about the lifetime
of objects and that's rather
more difficult in a structure.
So rather than using structures now,
we're asking you to adhere to what
has been common best practice anyway
and to use Objective-C objects.
Not only is this best practice,
but then you get a better
tool support and so on.
So where you might have used a
struct before with a reference
to an Objective-C object,
now simply create a new
class to represent that.
[Transcript missing]
Objective-C objects and core
foundation style objects.
We've got new casts,
new keywords to do the casting for you.
A couple of new ones introduced
with Mountain Lion and the old
style ones from Lion and before.
Better still, actually,
is if you can possibly avoid using
core foundation style objects,
avoid using them in the first place.
An example here might be CFUUID.
If you're currently using CFUUID,
look towards using NSUUID instead.
Fourth rule, no auto-release pools.
So this may not affect
that many people anyway,
but if you happen to be
using auto-release pools,
again, the compiler can't do
very much with those,
so we now have an at
auto-release pool block instead.
An advantage here is that
this works even without ARC.
So you'll actually see in any new project
that you create that don't use ARC,
you'll still see at auto-release pool.
And it turns out this is
actually much more efficient.
From your perspective as a developer,
how then do you think about ARC?
What are the considerations
that you have if you're not
thinking about memory management?
Instead of memory management,
you now want to think
about object ownership.
You need to think about the references
between objects and how you define those.
In particular, if you want to assure the
longevity of an object,
you need to have a
strong reference to it.
A strong reference to an object
will keep that object alive.
As soon as there are no strong
references to an object,
it'll be deallocated.
So fundamentally,
you have to start thinking
about your application,
your program from a higher level in
terms of your object graph and the
relationships between the objects.
And as a corollary,
stop thinking then about retain
release and auto release.
One of the aspects of thinking about
your object graph then is if strong
references keep an object alive,
what happens if I want to reference to
an object that doesn't keep it alive?
This is where weak references come in.
A weak reference is a reference to an
object that indicates non-ownership.
It doesn't keep the
referenced object alive.
Moreover,
unlike existing just simple pointers,
a weak reference automatically
drops to nil when the object
that it points to is deallocated.
Week references supported in
ARC using properties with the week
property attribute and underscore
underscore week as a variable keyword.
Week references come into
play in particular when you're
thinking about the possibility
of cycles in your object graph.
Just like standard
traditional memory management,
ARC doesn't give you any protection
against what we used to call retained
cycles and what we're now going
to call strong reference cycles.
So if you have a strong reference cycle,
you will still get leaks.
The good news here at least is that the
patterns that you've used up until now to
prevent these sorts of things still work.
So setting property values to
nil and so on will still apply.
Having a strong reference
from a parent to a child,
but weak references from child to
parent and so on will all help you avoid
reference cycles in your object graph.
Judicious use finally then of
weak references are going to be a
fundamental tool to combat these.
Another question that comes to mind is
obviously how well does this perform?
Am I going to see performance degradation
as a result of switching across to ARC?
Good news here is, no,
you generally should not.
Indeed,
what we've usually seen is that the
peak high watermark of an application's
memory use actually decreases using ARC.
Moreover, you don't have the sorts of
issues that you might have with
a garbage collected system.
So generally,
no problems with performance.
So in summary,
ARC then provides you with a simplified
model for memory management that should
lead to you writing less code and be
able to think about the interesting code
that you actually want to write that
differentiates your application rather
than the memory management semantics,
which ultimately leads to more stable,
better-performance applications.
So, you should use it.
And with that then,
I'll hand across to Dave.
Thanks, Malcolm.
So how does Arc actually work?
So as Malcolm showed,
memory management is hard.
There are lots of rules and conventions,
and it's a high hurdle
for new developers.
And we really want everybody
to be able to come and write
great apps for our platforms.
And it's a constant attention to
detail problem that you'd rather
not be spending your time on.
And it requires perfection,
as Malcolm described.
So let's show you why it can be hard.
Let's say you were creating
a RPN calculator where you
can say like five enter,
four plus, and get a result.
You would need to implement a stack.
So here's a stack.
Now, there are lots of bugs here.
Let's start going through them.
This array, if we don't retain it,
it's gonna leak because class methods
in our conventions return auto-released,
so we need to retain this.
[Transcript missing]
What else are we missing?
Well, now that we've balanced this out,
we need to deal with this problem.
A removeLast object
might have side effects.
This might invalidate X.
So how do we work around this?
Well, we add a retain.
And we add an auto-release.
So now any side effects that removeLast
object has will not prevent this object
from being prematurely deallocated.
So that's it.
So that's our stack.
So ARC makes this easy.
You can write code naturally.
And you can break cycles
easily when necessary.
You can stop worrying about
the individual retains.
And you can write great apps.
So what we're going to talk
about next is how ARC works.
It'll be automating what
you're doing anyway.
It applies local rules,
both to local variables
and to return values,
and we'll discuss those in that order.
And it guarantees local correctness,
and then we optimize after
we've applied the local rules.
So what does this look like?
Let's talk about variables first.
Let's talk about Objective-C objects
and block pointers.
This includes local objects,
global objects, parameters,
instance variables, all variables.
There are four different
kinds of ownership.
So as Malcolm talked about,
we have strong references.
This is the default.
In fact, if you write this,
the compiler just assumes you wrote this.
That's what the desired effect is.
It's the default.
It is like a retained property,
where as long as this variable is set,
it's retained.
If it's set to nil,
then it releases the previous value.
Very simple rule.
Now, when you create a variable,
let's say you just
typed in a string name,
what happens?
Well, under ARC,
we need to have local simple rules.
This variable is now initialized to nil,
so you don't have to type that anymore.
It's safer, it's simpler,
it makes rules easy to implement.
So, destroying a variable.
Similarly, just like C,
we have local scoping rules.
This if block has two curly
braces and that name variable
is only valid within that scope.
At the end of that scope,
it's going to be released,
just like that.
This is what ARC does for you.
And this is true for Ivar's and the
DLX method because that's the end of
the scope of your object when it's done.
So reading and writing,
let's say you were to assign a variable,
a new one variable to another.
What does the compiler do?
Well, it retains the new one,
takes the old one, assigns the object,
and then it releases the previous value.
Again, really simple rules that the
compiler can automate and enforce.
As for auto-releasing,
let's say there's a very
common idiom in Cocoa code.
We have an out parameter for an NSError.
We check to see whether it's valid,
and if it's valid, then we assign to it.
The Cocoa convention is
that this is auto-released.
And in fact, under ARC,
this is what the compiler automates.
So we recognize this pattern
and we do the right thing.
Having said this,
this is not a general pattern,
so you probably won't run
across it much in your own code.
Finally, unsafe references.
They're like a traditional variable,
they're completely
unmanaged by the compiler.
They're not initialized,
there's no extra logic,
there's no restrictions.
So you can put them in C structs.
And in fact, that's exactly where
you'd want to use them.
So for example,
if you had a table at Global Scope that
you wanted to index into with a number
and then get an NSString out of it,
you would declare that NSString is unsafe
unretained and then be done with it.
And as long as you
never update that table,
you're going to be done with it.
table, the right thing happens.
Finally, weak references.
This is a great new concept with ARC,
and this allows for a safe and simple
way for us to model how to deal with
things that we don't want to own,
but we want to be able to reach.
So let's say you had an NSString.
And you wanted to reference it weekly,
so you could add that variable.
What the compiler will
omit is a store barrier.
It'll take the object and then ask the
runtime to update the week variable.
And then if we were to message it,
the compiler will omit a readweek to
see if the object is available or not.
And as hopefully you all know,
it's okay in Objective-C to message nil.
So if readweek returns nil,
this will be fine.
Similarly, if we wanted to zero it out,
we could just write nil out to the week
variable and the right thing will happen.
And the cool thing about Weak is,
as soon as the object starts destruction,
the variable becomes nil to any
other clients trying to read it.
So that's it.
That's the rules for local variables.
The rules for return values now
are much like you've already
done with existing programming.
And the questions are,
does this transfer ownership?
Are they returned retained?
Are we allocating new objects,
for example?
And it's similar to transferring into
and out of ARC like Malcolm described.
And we do this by looking
at the method family name.
The Cocoa convention is that
the first word of the object
tells you what the semantics are.
And the first word is the lowercase
part up until the capital part.
So initWith is an initializer,
initialize is your own thing.
So the words that we
care about are alloc,
copy, init, mutable copy, and new.
These transfer ownership, i.e.
they return retained or plus one,
and everything else does not.
So if you have a method
named copyMachine,
guess what?
It returns plus one.
So for normal return values,
let's say we had this basic getter
to return something called serial.
There's no transfer of ownership.
What ARC does is it does what you
should have been doing all along,
which is you retain the object
and return it auto-released.
This is the Cocoa convention,
and now ARC makes the natural
thing do the right thing.
Similarly,
if you said new serial and now we're
conforming to the Cocoa convention
for returning plus one,
ARC will know that we need
to pass this back retained,
so it'll generate a retain
and return the value.
So similarly, if on the caller side,
we need the ARC will
automate based on the name.
So in this particular case,
we're calling new serial and we're
just having a temporary variable
that's being passed straight to NSLog.
Well, ARC's going to automate this and
actually create a temporary variable,
store it, pass the value to NSLog,
and then when we're done,
it'll call release.
I hope you agree that this is much
simpler and a powerful automation
so you can write natural code.
So let's go back to that stack and
talk about how ARC applies these
local rules and then optimizes.
So here in our NIT,
ARC is actually going to do this.
It's going to create a -- it's
going to look at the old variable,
cache it, retain the incoming variable,
and release the previous one.
Similarly,
it's going to generate a dialog method
to balance out the property in the class.
And ARC will automate
the call to superdialog,
which is very important so that
way our superclass can clean up its
properties and instance variables.
Similarly, let's look at what POP does.
What does ARC do?
Well, we have two things to do, in fact.
We have to follow the
return value convention.
We have to retain the
previous value -- or,
sorry, we have to retain what we're
returning and auto-release it.
So, great.
We've followed this rule.
We also need to deal with side effects,
so we need to retain the value X and
then release it when we're done with it.
Because, as we talked about earlier,
removeLastObject might have side effects.
One of the side effects might
be a release of the object,
so we need to retain it locally.
When you combine these two,
you notice that we have a
redundant retain and release.
Well, guess what?
We've added an ARC optimizer to the
compiler and we can delete those,
thus generating the code you
would have written by hand,
the optimal code, by applying local rules
and then optimizing.
So in the end,
we can now write natural code.
We like NSMutableArray
because it's nice and short,
we only have one set of square brackets,
and ARC does the right thing.
We don't need to worry
about side effects,
which, to be the truth of it,
most of us forget about
them a lot of the time,
and our pop method just works.
And most of all,
we'd even need to write a dialog method.
We're all in a rush
to get things working,
sometimes we can forget to
clean things up at the end,
and ARC will just automate that for you.
Putting this all together,
ARC follows the convention
so you don't have to.
You can stop worrying about the
procedural aspect of retain and release,
you know, where do I put the retain,
where do I put the release?
You can actually focus
on the object graph.
And you can most of all
focus on making great apps.
So let's talk about migrating to ARC.
What is this process?
How does it work?
Well, we're going to talk it through.
We're going to talk about
the migration steps,
the common issues you might
run into and how to fix them.
We're going to talk about the deployment
of ARC and where you can use it.
And then finally,
we'll do a demo of migrating to ARC.
So, first of all,
you need to be using the latest compiler.
ARC works as of 3.0,
but 4.0 was announced at this
conference and has all the latest,
greatest optimizations,
and you should use it.
You use CONVERT to Objective-C ARC under
the Edit menu and refactoring of Xcode.
And you just work in
an iterative process.
And as you fix issues,
you just go back to Edit, say Refactor,
try the CONVERT.
And once all the issues are fixed,
you'll be presented with a dialog box
asking for your approval for the changes.
There it is under the menu.
It started with Xcode 4.2,
but it's available even
better with each release.
Once you are done fixing the issues,
the diff you get presented with,
you'll see all the calls for
retain and release are deleted.
As we talked about earlier,
one of the rules of ARC is that you can't
call retain and release or auto-release.
During the migration,
we have to delete those from your code.
Similarly,
for simple uses of auto-release pool,
we will just convert those to
at auto-release pool for you.
And finally, since assign is a dangling,
unsafe, unretained semantic,
we will convert those to weak
and give you safe behavior
for your weak properties.
So there's two phases.
Again, we're going to migrate and fix
problems in the iterative process,
thus we're going each time
to the Edit menu and trying
again as we fix issues.
And then the code will be
converted and present you a diff.
So one of the first issues we'll run into
that was a warning before ARC and now is
an error is a missing method declaration.
Because ARC needs to reason
about the memory semantics
of the code you're writing,
it needs to actually have the prototype,
the declaration,
so that it knows what's going on.
So, for example,
if we had a missing declaration here,
the compiler will emit a warning saying,
"Hey, the receiver,
we don't know what this selector is.
You know, hey,
tell us what's going on." Well,
it's real simple.
We'll go back to our
interface and fix it.
Similarly,
let's say you were trying to be
hyper-optimized and you wrote
an auto-release pool like this
so that periodically through the
event loop of this while loop,
we would drain the auto-release
pool and create a new one.
Well, the great news is that under ARC,
we actually optimize auto-release pools,
and they're significantly faster.
So you shouldn't even need to do this.
So you can just delete
this code to fix this.
And of course,
this is the warning you'll get
that it's unavailable this entire
class and you need to fix it.
Here's an example.
Because it's so fast,
we can just drop it right into the
while loop and not worry about it
and just let ARC do the right thing.
In fact,
it's six times faster than Snow Leopard,
and it's awesome.
So here's a subtle one.
Let's say you have a switch statement
and you love the fact that you can
declare variables anywhere you need them.
So you have a right inside
of your case statement,
you declare a new variable
named date and you assign to it.
Well, you're going to get an error
from the compiler that the switch
statement is in a protected scope.
And because switch statements are
basically syntactic sugar around go to,
the compiler has a difficult
time modeling what's going on.
Well, there's a real simple fix.
Just add two curlies,
give a bounded lifetime to that
variable within that case statement,
and let the compiler know your intent.
Real simple.
Similarly, the Singleton pattern can
get really interesting.
Let's say you were implementing some
kind of activity indicator and you
only have one of them in your process.
You might have said, "Well,
you know what?
I want this to be really awesome.
I'm going to take retain,
make it a no-op, release,
make it a no-op." All these
things are basically no-ops.
Well,
There's a bunch of ways we can fix this,
but first you're going to get a
bunch of errors from the compiler.
As we talked about earlier,
in order for ARC to be able
to reason about your code,
it needs to know what
these methods do exactly.
And if you're implementing them,
then ARC can't know because
it's just unbounded.
So we can't let you implement those.
So one way you could do this is
you could do a simple singleton
pattern where your alloc with zone
method allocates a shared instance.
And once that shared
instance is allocated,
it always returns that variable.
Now, of course,
your init method is going to have to
guard against this and make sure that we
don't reinitialize the shared instance.
So that's kind of complicated.
Now, of course,
you could change this so you
actually had a plus method,
a class method, and allocate your shared
instance that way.
Now you don't need to worry about
having init protect against it.
You don't need to override
this alloc with zone thing.
You can just make it a much
more formal part of your design
that there's a shared instance.
Similarly, if you're worried about
concurrency in your code,
you could wrap this up with a dispatch
once and use GCD to make sure that
there are no race conditions in
this shared instance indicator,
shared indicator.
One of the things we'd like to point out,
though,
the classes themselves are instances.
So you could actually just refactor
your code into a static global variable
and then change those minus signs to
plus signs for your singleton pattern.
And then you can just say, hey,
square bracket activity indicator, show.
And ta-da, you have a singleton pattern,
taking advantage of the fact that
classes themselves are singletons.
Similarly,
the delegate pattern gets a lot better.
You can use week now.
So in case you forget to say set
delegate nil as a part of your cleanup,
week will just do the right
thing and set it to nil for you.
So let's talk about deployment.
All of these things we've talked about
are available as of line in iOS 5.
As you saw earlier in the conference,
the adoption rates of both
of these operating systems
is just very impressive,
with 80% of our iOS
users already on iOS 5.
And I don't remember the exact number,
so I won't make it up for Microsoft 10.
But that was just really ramping up.
So
Lion in memory management.
As you've possibly seen in other talks,
ARC has been really successful.
We have no heap scans,
no whole app pauses,
no non-deterministic releases.
Well, what does this sound like?
In fact, ARC matches our framework
conventions really well.
We've really grown to design our
frameworks to rely on the exact
order of the release of objects,
and ARC automates this very well.
Because of all this,
we're deprecating GC.
We really think that a smooth,
fluid user interface is very
important to our customers,
and great battery life
is just as important.
So with that, GC is deprecated.
With that, I'd now like to switch to the
demo and show you what this
migration process looks like.
Right here, I have an app called WikiHow,
which I'll just click run
to show you before ARC.
So it gives you basic advice on how to
solve problems that you might run into.
So you can click around, obviously.
There we go.
So let's start the conversion process.
We go to Edit, we say Refactor,
Convert to Objective-C ARC.
Now, we can do this on a per-target
basis if we're not ready to
switch all of our project.
And if you're really advanced,
you can go through and do
it on a per-file basis.
But for the conversion process,
it works on a per-target basis.
Thank you.
So let's give it a whirl and
see what problems we run into.
We ran into 12 problems.
Okay.
So let's start with an easy one.
All right.
Well, we can't do these.
We can't implement, retain, release,
all these things.
So let's just delete that
and let ARC do that for us.
Great.
So here's a basic cast.
Well, we know that this is not
transferring any ownership,
so we'll just do a bridge.
And oh, here's one of those tables we
talked about where we have a
global table of ASCII escape
maps and we have an NSString in.
So here are the NSStrings that
we see that are just global.
Oh, great.
Let's just say unsafe, unretained, done.
No visible interface.
So what we're missing
here is the -- sorry,
multi-line.
The init with specifier is missing
from our interface declaration.
So we go to the -- let's
go to the implementation.
Classes.
[Transcript missing]
So here's another case.
Now here's a case where the
compiler is issuing a fixit.
Just tells us, great.
I'll do another fix-it.
These are, again, returning
plus zero.
So here's another case where
we're doing a context parameter
where we need to do a fix it.
[Transcript missing]
Great.
We've fixed all the issues and now
ARC is about to present us with a diff.
It's generating the preview,
it's removing all the retains
and releases and auto releases,
simplifying our dialog methods,
converting our auto release pools over
to the new simpler and faster syntax.
All right, great.
So we get a big diff.
As you can see here,
a bunch of code is being deleted.
So we got an entire dialog
method deleted here.
Similarly, there's that and there's...
All these releases are disappearing.
Autorelease disappeared.
All of the right thing happens
and the code gets simpler.
So with that, we can click Save.
we can click run.
And then ta-da.
So there we go.
Now we're back under ARC.
We can click around.
How to green your business.
So ARC is really efficient.
Great way to green your app.
So with that,
I'll switch back to the slides.
So as you've possibly
seen this slide earlier,
we've been simplifying
Objective-C from the very beginning.
We've added a thin but very powerful
object-oriented layer on top of C.
We added retain-release to
make it easier for developers
to coordinate between objects.
We added properties to simplify your
getter-setter patterns and synthesis
to simplify the implementation
of those getters and setters.
We added blocks to make enumeration
and callbacks very easy.
And now we've added ARC to delete
even more boilerplate from your code.
So for more information,
I'd invite you to
contact Michael Jurwitz.
We also have a very extensive programming
with ARC release notes that covers all
these things in great deal as well.
And then there's always the developer
forums we like to hang out as well.
We have some related sessions.
There was a session earlier that
you'll have to catch on video now,
but it's Modern Objective-C.
Tomorrow we have a "What's
New in LLVM?" talk.
And we also have a "Migrating to
Modern Objective-C" talk tomorrow.
If you have a friend
that missed this talk,
there's a rehash on Friday.
And with that, thanks for coming.